Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Sometimes we forget exactly how young some of our World War II veterans were when they laid their short lives on the line for us.
October 26, 1944, Jim Gordon of College Station flew his first B-24 mission over Austria.
The next day, he celebrated his 19th birthday.
He'd fly 34 more missions over Europe, most of them with the crew that he had been with since their training days back in Houston.
One of those missions earned him a Purple Heart.
It was all part of the life of a World War II tail gunner.
And we're proud to have Jim Gordon, our guest on Veterans of the Valley.
Jim, it's definitely proud to have you here.
Let's talk about the early days.
You grew up in Gilmer, Texas, and you wanted to come to Texas A&M.
Sort of talk about how that all came about.
Didn't really work out the way you wanted it to at A&M.
Talk about the early days before you joined up.
Well, I wanted to come to A&M.
My older brother was here.
So they had all these different programs, like a V-12, V-6, Army, Navy program, Air Force program.
And if you could get into college early enough and get into one of these programs, there was a chance you'd get to get a commission or get to be a flying officer.
Well, of course, that was my desire and everybody's desire, I guess, about then.
So my superintendent of school, John Avery, he let Dick Barrett, another friend of mine, graduate this early in January, 4-3, and we came on down here and enrolled, and Dick enrolled in a Navy program and I enrolled in, or tried to get in the
Air Force program, but it will fill up.
So there wasn't any chance of me getting in until the next semester.
So everybody thought, well, if you're going to get in the war, you better get in the war because this thing's going to be over.
It wasn't.
Right.
It was getting to the late part of the war.
So instead, you went to Houston.
You went to work for the shipyard.
You joined up in 1944.
Sort of take us after that.
A lot of people, when they first join up,
One of the first places... Actually, I joined up in 43, in May of 43.
Right, right.
Inducted in 43.
Right.
And at Ellington Field, and they said, I said, when do I report?
They said, we'll call you.
And eight months later, they did.
Like forever, you think, well, it's going to be over, you know.
And they called us up on 8th of January, 1944.
Right.
And so there was a whole group of us that had volunteered, 50 of us, and they shipped us out to San Antonio for indoctrination and uniforms and shots and things like that.
shipped us to Sheppard Field for basic training in January, if you can imagine.
Right, in Wichita Falls.
In Wichita Falls.
So you were going north and it was getting colder.
Getting colder.
Yes.
And then after basic training, they shipped us directly south again to Lareda, back to Chanky Clothes instead of ODs, and we took our gunnery training there.
at the Andrew Gunnery train while they shipped us north again to Lincoln, Nebraska to crew up to meet the guys we were gonna fly with.
And you weren't dressed for that, were you?
No.
It was snowing.
I was, we'd been in khakis in Lareda and I got off the train in
Lincoln, and it was snowing.
And it was cold.
So my buddy and I, old Don Fralick from Houston, we said we better do something.
And so we got us up in Nebraska.
They don't have gas and stuff.
It didn't at that time.
All of it was cold.
All of it burned for fuel.
So we had to get us around a big pot bed that stole, so we stayed warm.
And so we arranged for that.
And so from then, we were there about four or five days and they shipped us to Pueblo, Colorado.
Exactly.
And at Pueblo, that's where we crewed up on the way to Pueblo on a train to Pueblo.
Right.
And we were two days, I guess, on the train and had a meeting with the crew, the pilot and the co-pilot and a few of us.
So the pilot introduced himself, and we all introduced ourselves.
And he said, well, how did I get two ball gunners here?
And I said, well, it's like this.
I said, we both want to fly together on the same crew, so I'm going to be your tail gunner.
and Fredrick is going to be your ball gun.
So he said, well, how the hell did I get two Texans?
I told him, I said, you just got back here.
The crew was together, you went to Topeka, then eventually you went to the East Coast to Virginia.
Yeah, after that, after we did our training at...
Topeka?
Not at Topeka, at Pueblo.
At Pueblo, right.
We got a delay in route home, a furlough, about 10 days, and then we reported back to Topeka, and we got some more shots, and three days later, we were on a train to Camp Miles Standish in
Virginia, yeah, in Virginia.
And this camp was a port of embarkation for every service there was.
The rangers, everything.
And those guys were crazy.
Hell raising all the time, all night.
24 hours a day, usually getting to sleep or nothing.
So I was glad to get on the ship.
I guess you were.
You were on one of 172 ships.
that convoyed across the Atlantic to Italy.
It took us forever to load because there were so many ships.
But we got set sail one afternoon about 6 o'clock, and we picked up our escort, naval escort, right outside of the danger zone.
And we had our naval escort all the way over.
Now this was nearly a month, 28 days that you were at sea.
28 days it took us to get over.
And through some pretty dicey weather sometimes, right?
Yeah, we had some good weather.
We had three days.
In other words, when you want the chow, you didn't know whose mascot you were eating out of.
Because the ship was rocking so well.
It was rocking so well.
But anything was good in those days.
That's right.
So the weather was pretty... In 28 days, I guess you... It was.
And we had...
one submarine attack on the way over, and that the Navy took care of.
But then all of a sudden,
The weather got pretty and we were in Italy.
I mean, you know, it was just a change, just that big a change.
Indeed.
You docked it to Naples, Italy, I believe, and then eventually you took a train to what would be your home base in Panatella.
We docked at Naples and were there for about three days.
Some of the coldest weather you've ever been in and sleeping in tents.
which was nothing unusual.
We were going to do that the rest of our lives, it looked like.
Exactly.
And so we shipped out of there on a little narrow-gauge Italian freight train, and they took us up to Panatella, which was, I would say, 30 or 40 miles from Fogia.
People know more about the map of Italy, Fogia.
It was almost in the center.
So that was our base for the rest of the time we were there until we finished up.
That's where you flew in and flew out of.
We flew in and flew out.
You lived in the tent?
Lived in the tent.
Boy, how about.
I think a little later we've got a picture of that tent.
Oh, that's right.
The day before your 19th birthday, your very first mission, and that mission was kind of exciting, but it was sort of a sign of what was going to come because you actually got hit on your first mission, right?
Yeah, we did.
We got hit on our first mission.
And that night at the club, some of the guys said, Gordon, who'd you fly with today?
And I said, oh, somebody by the name of O'Connor.
And they said, fly away, O'Connor?
And I said, yeah.
They said, don't ever do that anymore.
He wasn't the right person to fly with.
He couldn't fly.
Jim, talk about what it's like, what it was like to be a tail gunner on a B-24.
I just, I can't imagine you're just alone, just sort of hanging over the earth there.
Is it exciting and lonely, but you were confident because you had been well-trained, I know that.
What was it like to be a tail gunner in World War II?
Well, actually, it was, to me,
I trained to be a ball gunner, which is a lower ball.
But to me, it was the best position on the plane.
I flew all the positions at one time or another as a volunteer to catch up when I was wounded.
And at the nose gunner, you saw too much.
And the tail gunner, you saw where you'd been.
And that's where I always was to see where I'd been.
But the nose gunner, you could see all the fighting and everything else.
It'd pass you.
So it was quite an experience.
I enjoyed it.
Right at the end of the war, we got a new L model, B-24, which gave us a stener and a tail.
So it wasn't a turret.
We didn't have to sit in the turret.
So we could just sit back there, stand back there, lay back there, and there was just a stener, and you just...
do your guns like that.
Exactly.
Made it a lot easier, a lot more comfortable.
If you could say you enjoyed it, yes, I enjoyed it.
Now, most of these 35 missions that you flew, you said the vast majority of them, you were hit in one way or another.
It was hardly a mission went by that your plane wasn't
didn't take some fire, right?
So you were used to that.
That's true.
You were attacked every time by TALAC.
That's from the 88 and 105 millimeter guns from the ground.
And you were attacked a lot of times by fighters, by German fighters.
But on a 35 mission thing, I would say that we were attacked
At least 30 times, flack our fighters.
Right.
But you just kept on going.
Oh, yeah.
That bird was tough, right?
You want to go back where you want to go to.
Exactly.
You just continue your mission.
Yeah, you go.
And some guys get shot up, lose an engine, turn around and go back.
And sometimes they made it, sometimes they didn't.
And we did that one time when we were lucky and made it.
right and uh but the engine goes out or gets shot out before we get to the target well what do you do you go on to the target or you turn around and go back and you call head head uh the colonel and ask you know wherever here we are what we're gonna do and he said he usually would say it's your it's your crew and so here you go right you make the decision you make your decision now we're talking about mission uh most of your missions i believe were to uh
take out fuel supplies of the Germans, take out train tracks, train transportation?
Anything to delay their war effort.
The greatest thing I wanted to take out, I wasn't running, was the fighters, the German fighters.
I like the man we wanted to take out was the fuel supply, like Philistine, and Vienna, and up at Nussbaum, and all the buchant fineries.
And then we tried to take out the jet
factories and refineries that made fuel for the jet planes.
Exactly.
We're going to talk about January of 1945, a mission that day when you were wounded.
But first, I want to go to some photographs.
These are some of the pictures that actually hang in your home that you let us borrow.
And we're going to go to some of them right now.
If we can go to the first one, Jim.
There's a picture of young Jim Gordon.
About how old were you there?
19.
You were 19 years old?
So you were a young rookie right then.
Right then, right.
Good-looking airman.
Now that's the one I was talking about a while ago.
This is a B-24 that was actually flying in formation next to you, and this picture was taken from your airplane.
Is that right?
This is the one we refer to.
throughout the Air Force, a black man.
And that's the one that's hanging on the wall that's colored that I was talking to you about that I like to... That you have the painting of.
I have the painting of.
Right.
So what are we looking at there?
Obviously, we're talking about a plane in a lot of trouble.
Actually, they're a box away from us.
There's a box of seven planes between us.
And so they just got a direct hit.
In fact, the conversation over the intercom was, from our navigator was, old Stinovich is going to get hit.
He's flying over that battery.
And about that time, he got hit.
There was only five shots in that battery, and the fifth one hit him.
Now, that's how luck goes.
Now, you told me that there was one survivor from this airplane as it's about to go down.
How did that?
He was evidently, nobody knows.
except that they think he was standing on the catwalk and just watching the bomb burst.
This was what we call a low-level mission at 20,000 feet.
And so you could see pretty good the ground.
And so he was standing out there and they got that direct hit in that engine there where it broke the engine off and flipped the airplane and it flipped him out.
And he evidently, luckily, had his shoot on.
He landed in an olive orchard
and broke both legs and he was captured in a German prisoner of war camp and he became commander officer as a second lieutenant.
My goodness.
Now I want to keep this picture up there for just a second because this is our only picture really of a B-24.
When you were flying in the B-24, we could look at the rear of the plane, we see the two gun barrels sticking out.
That would have been your gun barrels on your plane, right?
Right.
And then you can see the nose capsule up there, and then what you call the down below.
That's the... It's very bald.
That's the bald.
It's hidden behind the fire.
Right.
Actually, all you got to do is just do like that, and your plane is right side up.
Exactly.
That's a fascinating picture.
It was a fascinating picture.
You saw this happening.
One of the, I guess, the most famous of Air Force pictures in World War II.
So this plane was to your right?
To my right.
So you were actually looking, I guess, to your left out of the back to actually see this going on.
Yeah, you were looking to your left because you were in the back.
As the talk was going on, everybody switched on that.
Wow.
Okay, let's go on to the next photograph we have.
Here's your crew.
This is a picture that hangs in your office, and I know that you're very proud of it.
And that's you sitting right there front and center in the middle.
Yeah, 6 o'clock.
Right there, right there.
The smiling airman there.
And that's your crew that you were with from when you all first reported in Houston all the way up.
This was taken in Pueblo, Colorado in 1944.
Right.
And we were together until we got back.
Two states.
And I believe you told me that out of that group right now, there's three of you that are still living.
Yes, three of us still living.
Oh, well, I know that you get to see that picture every day, and I know that that means a lot to you.
Let's go on to the next photograph.
There's where you lived.
That's the Hilton.
That's the Panatella Hilton, right?
Right.
In Panatella, Italy.
With all the room service you can imagine.
How many lived in that tent?
Six of us.
Six of you.
You see all the plumbing outside and everything?
How nice it is?
I do.
I see that plumbing outside.
I got to say, most of the plumbing was hopefully in the back.
That's good.
And you had some great landscaping there.
Yes, it is.
This was built in an olive orchard.
Those were olive trees in the back there.
Right, right.
Well, that was home.
My goodness.
This is your brother that's in the cockpit of this plane.
Talk about him.
Well, Edwin was the Aggie.
He was in the 8th Air Force.
He was in the G Infantry here at school.
as quickly as he got his commission while he transferred to the Air Force.
And he got overseas a little later, a little after I did.
He was signed to the 8th Air Force to 351, which was one of the, I think, the hottest fighter we had at that time in probably forever.
And after he completed his missions, he went down to Munich, down in that area there, and did a year or two of Air Force occupation.
Then came home, went back to A&M, and finished up six hours and graduated.
I want to talk more about your family a little bit later.
Let's go ahead and go to the next picture.
This is one of your reunions with six of you there.
This was probably 1989.
You're standing in the middle, by the way.
Yes, I am.
1989 in Las Vegas.
And my pilot's standing to my left shoulder there.
The radio operator's out here.
And Fredrick, the boy, is to my right.
And Chuck Williams is over there to the right.
Now Chuck was a, I'll tell you in a minute about Chuck.
And Ed Gordon, who was no relationist,
kneeling down there in the bottom.
Chuck was a, he came to us as you form up and you build and you, you know, things fall apart.
We had like two guys that got air shook all the time, could not fly.
And, you know, true or false, you can't use them.
So you replaced them.
So Chuck came to us from a crew that had, Chuck was in town that day visiting his girlfriend and his crew was flying.
And they crashed into one of those mountains out there, killed them all, and Chuck was the only one alive.
And Chuck came with us and lived to tell about it.
Oh, my goodness.
What a sad story.
But I'm glad that he lived.
And there's three of you, out of those six that we just saw, there's three of you that are still alive.
January 20, 1945, talk about that mission because you earned your Purple Heart that day.
Talk about what happened to you.
Well, it was...
Just a regular mission.
We were flying about 28,000 feet.
It was 65 or low zero.
And we got hit by a plaque.
And I was the only one actually that got hit.
It severed my oxygen mind.
And so as we come off the target, why the pilot, he wasn't always called oxygen shells.
And so you'd say tail okay, ball okay, waist okay.
Well, when I didn't say, okay, well then they sent somebody back there looking at me.
Well, there I was slumped over my control.
Well, what had happened, one of my tubes had been severed and so I wasn't getting any oxygen.
And so they grabbed an oxygen bottle off the wall and slapped it on me and brought me around and saved my life.
Right, but you had been wounded.
Yeah.
Talk about seeing your ear.
Well, this is what we were trained for, you know, to an emergency like that.
And the navigator, LaRogers, came from the front of the plane to the back of the plane to give me first aid.
So that night, they put me in the fourth field hospital.
And I was sitting there on that table.
Of course, you know, I hadn't drank a whiskey by then, you know.
Sitting there on a gurney.
And I was the last one.
There was a lot of wounded that day.
And I was the last one they got a hold of.
Of course, I guess I was the least wounded.
So I could look at my left.
I could look to my left, and I could see my ear.
Now, if you can look at your left and see your ear,
You're wounded.
But anyway, so the major, an old major surgeon, he said, Sergeant, I think we're going to have to cut your ear off.
And I said, not mine.
And he said, yes, sir.
So there was a captain there that had just gotten back from New York Burn Institute, where they'd been training them.
And he said, Major, let me have a few days with him.
And he used penicillin on me.
And I go, well, that was the first time penicillin was used in that theater.
Right.
And so that's how...
how wonderful it was at that time.
And so you were actually back flying with them.
25 days I was back flying.
And you were back flying.
Back flying, so trying to catch up with the crew before they went home.
We're starting to run a little short on time, but I want you to talk about that.
You actually flew some missions with another group just to catch up with your crew because you all had pretty much promised each other you'd go home at the same time.
So you wanted to get your 35 in the same time they got their 35 in.
So I was flying every day, every other day.
As fast as I could to catch up, and I caught up.
And you did catch up.
And you all went home together.
Went home together.
Talk about, real quick, you told me about you were a cigar smoker.
And one time that became a real bad idea.
What happened?
Oh, well, this will break you from smoking cigarettes.
Yeah, it will.
I smoked cigarettes from I don't know when.
I never smoked cigarettes.
Smoked cigarettes.
And so every time we'd get on, we'd take off, I always had a cigarette in my pocket.
Well, I would get the oxygen when we had to put oxygen masks on.
Well, I'd light my cigar up.
And so let's just go on and go on.
And cigars didn't burn very fast up in that high oxygen.
They were very slow.
Well, one day I was sitting back there in the sunlight smoking that cigar, and we got a direct hit.
And this fuel, this everything from fuel hit me, and I was standing there.
Smoking a cigar.
But there was so little oxygen.
So little oxygen, it didn't call the fire.
It didn't explode.
Instead, I think you told me that the gasoline actually put out the cigar.
We did.
We put out the cigar.
But I quit.
That's a good reason to quit.
Very good reason to quit.
We've just got a couple of minutes left, and I do want to move on.
You did go home with your crew.
I want you to talk about your family because it's a fascinating story.
I know all of your brothers, you and your brothers, they all served.
You have children who served, and you have a great niece, as a matter of fact, that you have a picture of in your home.
You're a family of military service, aren't you?
Quite.
Yes.
In fact, all of us.
I feel, as I can recall, son-in-law, everybody.
But speaking of Debbie.
That's a great niece.
That's my great niece.
She's a lieutenant colonel.
I mean, she's a colonel, full colonel.
And will be a lieutenant general, big general next time.
And she's 34 years old, has flown in three or four wars.
She's a tanker pilot.
Of course, then you saw my brother.
There was a pilot.
And my son-in-law, you didn't see him.
He was a helicopter pilot.
And I believe you have a nephew that's serving in Iraq right now.
Yeah.
In fact, I have three of them.
One of them is there right now, but they've been rotating in and out.
You and your wife, Jean, have been married for 40 years.
And for 40 years and still going, 56 years, you've been a pharmacist.
And you know what?
We're out of time.
But we thank you very much for your service, and I wish we had more time to talk about it.
but it goes fast.
It does.
Thank you, Jim.
Thank you.
I appreciate it.
Like most all who survived World War II, Jim Gordon followed his military service with a civilian career.
And for Jim Gordon, it was as a pharmacist now for some 56 years and counting.
He comes from an extended family of military service, and he is as proud of that as anything else.
We thank Jim Gordon, his family, and all veterans for their service.
And thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbiville for Jim Gordon.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.